Fill out sections based on initial discussion (#9)
filip-sakel/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-refining-property-wrapper-related-initialization.md

## Introduction

> *TBC*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[SE 0258](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/master/proposals/0258-property-wrappers.md) introduced property wrappers; due to their complexity, though, there were some inconsistencies. Function-like declarations were unsupported until [SE 0293](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0293-extend-property-wrappers-to-function-and-closure-parameters.md#detailed-design). These initial inconsistencies combined with the limited-scope 0293 features fragmented property-wrapper-related initialization. Namely, memberwise initializers use complex, poorly documented rules and projection initialization is reserved solely for function parameters.
```

Today, the rules for how wrapped properties are represented in the synthesized memberwise initializer for structs are poorly documented and quite complex. To summarize the points from [this thread](https://forums.swift.org/t/does-the-new-swift-5-5-init-projectedvalue-functionality-not-work-with-synthesized-memberwise-initializers/51232/7), the rules are:
- If a property wrapper defines an `init(wrappedValue:)` initializer, the memberwise initializer will use the `wrappedValue` type (i.e. `MyView(value: Int)`).
  - Exception: if the property wrapper is default initialized, the memberwise initializer uses the property wrapper type, even if the property wrapper also has an `init(wrappedValue:)` unless the wrapped property is initialized in-line with `=`.
- If there's no `init(wrappedValue:)` initializer, the memberwise initializer will use the property wrapper's type itself (i.e. `MyView(value: Binding<Int>)`).
- If `init(wrappedValue:)` takes extra arguments without default values, the memberwise initializer uses the property wrapper type unless the wrapped property is initialized in-line with `=`.

> The result is that the author of a type with wrapped properties cannot easily determine or control what the signature of their memberwise initializer will look like—it relies on subtle interactions between the property wrapper type, the declaration of the wrapped property, and how that property is initialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is that the author of a type with wrapped properties cannot easily determine or control what the signature of their memberwise initializer will look like; instead, it relies on subtle interactions between the property wrapper type, the declaration of the wrapped property, and how that property is initialized.
```

Furthermore, the current ruleset can implicitly expose the private storage of the property wrapper via the (implicitly `internal`) synthesized initializer. This behavior may be undesirable, and for a given wrapper there may be no way for a user to avoid it other than giving up on the synthesized initializer altogether and defining their own.

> Now that property wrappers are supported in function signatures, it's not entirely clear why the memberwise initializer is synthesized the way it is. Were we designing the synthesized initializer today, we likely wouldn't have such a complex set of rules since we have a way to directly represent wrappers in parameter lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that property wrappers are supported in function signatures, it's not entirely clear why the memberwise initializer is synthesized the way it is. Were we to design the synthesized initializer today, we likely wouldn't have such a complex set of rules since we have a way to directly represent wrappers in parameter lists.
```

SE-0293 also added a new way of initializing property wrapper storage from a projected value using a new special initializer, `init(projectedValue:)`. However, while the new `$`-initialization syntax works for function arguments and closure parameters, global, type, and local properties have no such equivalent.

Thus, the current state of affairs is ripe for refinement. Property wrappers have matured to a point where we can easily simplify certain special cases, and extend the general functionality to support a consistent model for property wrappers everywhere.

## Proposed Solution

> We propose two additions to the feature set of property wrappers in order to improve consistency with the model adopted in SE-0293. 

Reviewer: Nitpick:

```suggestion
We propose two additions to the feature set of property wrappers that will improve consistency with the SE-0293 model.
```
Motivation already outlined the arguments for the proposed feature; we can just specify which design aspects we'll correct.

First, we propose an update to the rules of the synthesized memberwise initializer for types with wrapped properties such that wrapper attributes are mapped directly into the initializer 

> For example, a type such as this one from TSPL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a type such as this one from [TSPL](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Properties.html#ID617):
```

    @SmallNumber(maximum: 9) var width: Int = 2
}
```

would recieve a synthesized memberwise initializer that looks like:

```swift
init(@SmallNumber height: Int = 1, @SmallNumber(maximum: 9) width: Int = 2) {
  ...
}
```

Second, we propose allowing property wrapper storage for global, type, and local wrapped properties to be initialized via the `init(projectedValue:)` system (as discussed in the future directions of SE-0293). E.g.:

```swift
@Wrapper
var property: Int

$property = someProjectedValue
```

## Detailed Design

### Synthesized memberwise initializer and property wrappers

We propose a new algorithm for generating the synthesized memberwise initializer as it relates to wrapped properties. Rather than trying to decide whether to expose the storage type or the wrapped type in the initializer, a property declared in a type `MyType` as:

```swift
@Wrapper(arg: value)
var property: X = initialValue
```

will always be represented in the synthesized memberwise initializer signature as:

```swift
init(..., @Wrapper(arg: value) property: X = initialValue, ...)
```

(where the argument list after `Wrapper` and the `initialValue` may or may not be present).

> Note that the rules for property wrappers in parameter lists all apply as normal. Most importantly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the rules for property wrappers in parameters are outlined in [SE 0293](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0293-extend-property-wrappers-to-function-and-closure-parameters.md#detailed-design). Most importantly:
```

> - If the property declaration _does_ provide arguments to the wrapper attribute, `Wrapper` will always be an implementation detail property wrapper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the property declaration _does_ provide arguments to the wrapper attribute, `Wrapper` will always be an implementation-detail property wrapper.
```

> - If `Wrapper` provides an `init(projectedValue:)`, then the synthesized memberwise initializer will be callable via the `$` syntax, e.g.,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If `Wrapper` provides an `init(projectedValue:)`, then the corresponding parameter will be prefixed with `$` and accept the projected-value type,
```

Author: A slight further rewording:

```suggestion
- If `Wrapper` provides an `init(projectedValue:)`, then when calling the initializer the corresponding parameter may be prefixed with `$` and accept the projected-value type:
```

    ```swift
    let _ = MyType(..., $property: ProjectedValue(), ...)
    ```
    

> Refer to SE-0293 for a detailed discussion of how the property wrapper transformation proceeds for wrapped arguments.

Reviewer: This is unnecessary with the change at the start of the paragraph.

```suggestion
```

> If the specific initializers declared by the `Wrapper` type would result in an un-callable synthesized initializer (for example, because `Wrapper` provides no appropriate `init(wrappedValue:)` or `init(projectedValue:)`), an error will be emitted and the user will have to adjust their property declaration or define a custom initializer (see [**Source Compatibility**](#source-compatibility) below for more information).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The synthesized initializer may be uncallable under the new rules — if, for instance, it doesn't provide a default value or a special `init(wrappedValue:)` or `init(projectedValue:)` initializer. In that case, calling the initializer will result in a call site error and a warning next to the uninitializable property.  (See [**Source Compatibility**](#source-compatibility) for more information).
```

The warning-not-error change is consistent with the warning emitted when declaring a defaulted constant in a `Codable` struct:

```swift
struct Hello: Codable {
    let hey = 5 // ⚠️ Immutable property will not be decoded because it is declared with an initial 
                // value which cannot be overwritten
}
```

Author: Hmm, in my mind the error was analogous to the error emitted on a class with no initializer:

```
class C { // error: class 'C' has no initializers
    var x: Int
}
```

Leaving this open for now to discuss further. 🙂

Reviewer: (Since this question could be raised in review, we should probably add a rationale for what we settle on.)

Good point. However, classes and structs differ in terms of subclassing and unsafe instantiation. 

Firstly, classes support subtyping. This means that the subclass must first initialize `super`, which is impossible (in safe code) with the `C` class above. (That's important because `C` also provides a stored property, potentially used by methods that'll be inherited by subclasses.) Admittedly, this is argument is undermined by the fact that adding `final` is still is erroneous; but, to be honest, this feels like an inadvertent design deficiency.

Another difference is the lack of straightforward unsafe instantiation. That is, we can unsafely get a `struct` instance without (accessible) initializers pretty easily. That's more difficult with classes, though, which are pointers to their reference count, payload, and other properties I'm unfamiliar with.

Perhaps I'm overthinking this, but I think an error is too limiting for structs when a warning would suffice. What's more, even if the user ignores the warning, it won't be long before they want to initialize their struct and encounter an actual error.

What do you think?

```swift
$property = someProjectedValue
```

which will be transformed to:

```swift
_property = .init(projectedValue: someProjectedValue)
```

Anywhere the storage has been initialized, `$property` retains its usual meaning and will refer to the `projectedValue` property of the wrapper.

Note that `$property` may be assigned in this manner even in more complex expressions such as:

```swift
(someOtherProperty, $property) = (initialValue, someProjectedValue)
```

This transformation takes place even if `_property.projectedValue` does not provide a setter, since we are formally assigning `_property`, not the projected value. 

## Source Compatibility

### Staging in the new memberwise initializer

Changing the algorithm which generates the memberwise initializer is a source-breaking change, and therefore must be introduced in a new language version. As a concrete example, this proposal will change initialization syntax for SwiftUI views which use `@Binding` and rely on the synthesized initializer:

```swift
struct MyView: View {
    @Binding
    var x: Int

    var body: some View {
        Text("\(x)")
    }
}

> MyView(x: $someInt) // old init

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MyView(x: .constant(5))  // ❌old init
```

> MyView($x: $someInt) // new init

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MyView($x: .constant(5)) // ✅ new init
```

```

To ease the transition to the new memberwise initializer, we propose the following plan:

> - In the Swift 5 language mode, both the old and the new memberwise initializer will be synthesized. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the Swift 5 language mode, both the old and the new memberwise initializers will be synthesized. 
```

  - In otherwise ambiguous cases, the old initializer is unconditionally preferred over the new one during overload resolution. 

>   - The old initializer will not be suggested in code completion or appear in the "sanitized" swiftinterface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The old initializer will not be suggested in code completion or appear in the "sanitized" swiftinterface (presented for frameworks by Xcode).
```

- In the Swift 6 language mode, both the old and the new memberwise initializer will be synthesized. 
  - In otherwise ambiguous cases, the _new_ initializer is unconditionally preferred over the old one during overload resolution. 
  - The old initializer will not be suggested in code completion or appear in the "sanitized" swiftinterface, and uses of the old initializer will warn about its impending removal.
  - If the new initializer would not be callable, a warning is emitted.

- In a future language version (Swift 7?), only the new memberwise initializer will be synthesized. Any attempt to use the old initializer is an error.
  - If the new initializer would not be callable, an error is emitted.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The flags `-warn-wrapper-init` and `-force-wrapper-init` may be used to opt into Swift 6 or Swift 7 mode respectively.
```

Author: Slight rewording:

```suggestion
The flags `-warn-wrapper-init` and `-force-wrapper-init` may be used to opt into the Swift 6 or Swift 7 behavior with regards to the synthesized memberwise initializer.
```

### Projected value initialization

This aspect of the proposal is completely additive and will be source-compatible.

## Effect on ABI Stability

This feature and the features it depends on are either entirely non-public or implemented entirely in terms of frontend transformations and do not have an impact on ABI.

## Effect on API Resilience

Because the synthesized memberwise initializer is always non-`public`, this proposal does not introduce any functionality that would affect API resilience.

## Alternatives Considered

*TBC*

## Future Directions

### Inline projected value initialization

The `$`-initialization syntax could be extended to allow for its use in the declaration of the wrapped property itself, e.g.:

```swift
struct S {
  @Wrapper

>   var $property: Int = someProjectedValue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  var $property: Wrapper = someProjectedValue
```

I think we should change this, even if it's a future direction.

Note: Bullet point 3 would need to be updated too.

Author: I will accept these suggestions here and follow up with a commit that fixes any inconsistencies. I agree this model makes more sense, but it changes the precise wording of my objections.

}
```

would expand to:

```swift
struct S {
  private var _property: Wrapper = .init(projectedValue: someProjectedValue)
    
  var property: Int {
    get { _property.wrappedValue }
    set { _property.wrappedValue = newValue }
  }
}
```

The authors elect to exclude such a construction from this proposal. The suggested syntax above tries to do many things at once:
1. Declare a property named `property`.
2. Declare the type `Int` for that property.
3. Declare a wrapper/storage type `Wrapper` for that property.
4. Declare that the property should be initialized via `init(projectedValue:)`.
5. Declare the projected value to be passed to `init(projectedValue:)`.

> Notably, with the syntax above, the type of `$property` and the initial value expression do _not_ necessarily agree with the `Int` type annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
